+++
title = "About"
date = "2019-01-25"
author = "Radek"
+++

Impostor syndrome and the genius myth permeate much of mathematics, and it has affected me more than I would have liked in my years studying math. Recently, however, I feel much better about the relationship between myself and mathematics. It took a radical shift in the way I think about how I interact with math, and by writing these thoughts down, I hope to remind myself of these thoughts if in the future I find myself doubting again whether I belong in math.

In my first year of my undergraduate studies, I took a proof based linear algebra class. I had no idea what it was and what I was getting myself into, and honestly, I don't think I really gained any knowledge from that course. I found myself struggling every day, trying to read the textbook to get some semblance of understanding and failing, and even when working with classmates late at night I felt unable to contribute anything meaningful. I saw myself barely able to keep myself afloat while others were asking questions I could not comprehend. I did not recognize the feeling at the time, but looking back, I felt like I did not belong -- on campus, in the classroom, and in math. By the end of the semester, being in math felt like I was in an unrecognizable, hostile terrain where I was barely surviving.

I constantly ask myself why I stayed. I think a lot had to do with the first lecture I attended. There was a charisma and passion when the professor spoke, and I think I wanted to see what she saw, because by the end of the year, after taking two courses with her, I had decided to enter the world of abstract math. Yet, in the back of my mind, I had this intense feeling of being out of place and having to catch up to be a "real" math person. In my rush to catch up, I skipped over prerequisite classes to the point I barely understood what was going on, and then scraped by with decent enough grades to repeat the process. Although there were moments where I felt an intense rush of wonder at the world of mathematics, almost always, that feeling would be followed up with thoughts of insecurity and self-criticism.

The turning point in my conception of mathematics came when I started working for BEAM, an organization dedicated to introducing advanced mathematics to low-income students of color. Here, I was able to feel and experience mathematics for the sake of mathematics for the first time. Here, I wasn't competing with anyone, I was exploring with the students, looking at mathematics and enjoying the process of confusion. Most notably, I didn't feel out of place. Even though I was one of two Asian counselors that summer, I felt at home in an predominantly Black space. This was in contrast to an overwhelmingly White space on campus where I felt alone.

It has taken me a long time to pin down what felt so welcoming about this new space, and what was so unwelcoming about the space I had been in. Everyone at BEAM had their own version of mathematics, and no one was afraid to share. Every time I entered the break room, half the staff would be chatting and playing games while the other half was busy with math puzzles and problems. There, math was not something to chase, but something to nurture within ourselves, for ourselves. On the other hand, on campus, I felt as though I was chasing this ideal of mathematics that professors expected us to mold to. There was a “good” and “rigorous” mathematics. A version of math that required us to leave our identities outside of the classroom. When asking this of us, professors were asking us to be neutral, but asking this of us always asks us to uphold the status quo.

Mathematical communities often ask us to be neutral -- to focus on the math and nothing else. However, mathematics is something extremely personal, and it is essential to treat it as such. In order to communicate these experiences accurately, we end up using methods that are often devoid of emotion. This is quite unfortunate as it makes math seem dry and uninviting. If only there were experts in the field that could try to convey the beauty of what they were studying. If only they would seek to nurture our own mathematics instead of asking us to chase their notion of mathematics.
What does nurturing my own mathematics look like? This idea came about when I started to write a study guide for myself. I was inspired by some of my classmates who started summarizing what they had learned into personal notes. As I started to plan what I was going to write, I found myself discovering what I thought was important and significant, and how I structured the knowledge I had gained. These ideas were quite different from what I had read from the textbooks that I learned from. Therefore, a textbook, in a sense, is a physical manifestation of the author’s mathematics. Authors across time and space have nurtured their mathematics through different paths, with varied perspectives, and in each textbook those experiences are represented.

We do not need to publish a textbook for our version of math to exist, but the question of how to recognize our math remains. When we can declare “that’s really cool,” we are telling ourselves that we found a new piece of math to fit into our own world of mathematics. No one should be able to claim its triviality or otherwise, because it is ours to keep. When I would have moments of wonder when trying to finish a problem set, if I could have reflected on what these feelings meant to me instead of criticizing myself for not finishing a problem set, I think I would have been able to maintain a healthier relationship with mathematics.

I now believe we become mathematicians when we obtain a sense of our own mathematics. I have my mathematics and for that reason alone I belong.
